# Obfuscated science = pseudo-science

The times change automatically. Standards don't.

And the times in science have changed. We have seen many changes in the last decade, both in new knowledge, new techniques, but also how we regard science itself. Most memorably and depicting might be the paper "Why most published research is false".

So I want to talk to you, but also with you, about how these standards have kept up. Sometimes standards are used as arguments for doing things in a certain way, but that is too easy. When I recognize a standard, it typically sparks my curiosity and leads me to ask why that is the standard and whether we can do better. Not out of discontent, but out of simple multiplicity (I will come back to this later).

When I talk about standards I don't necessarily mean explicit standards such as the ISO 8601 date-format standard. I talk more about the descriptive and normative standards that are active in science. But having mentioned the ISO 8601 date-format standard, I can't help but mention the anecdote that I concocted the same standard without my knowledge of it even existing when I was having trouble sorting files by dates easily. This standard is one I can definitely get behind because I see the value of it.

However, there are many standards in science, and I don't necessarily support them for a variety of reasons. Today, I want to talk about several of these that relate so very clearly to the changes we have gone through in science and the problems we currently face. This pertains to all of us, but I certainly don't profess to hold the answers---so please be critical of my ideas.

Before we discuss the standards themselves, it might be worthwhile to mention what is to expected of the standards. First, the standards should be non-conflicting. We cannot have one standard prescribe one thing and another standard contradict it, because then it makes the standards futile. Second, the standards should be harmonizable across all of science, that is, not discipline specific. Third, the standard should not be absolute. Fourth, the standards should not be smart standards that aim to solve specific problems, but stupid standards, that require the least amount of effort and pertain to abstract notions. Implementation standards are a topic for another time.

Let us evaluate a few of science's current standards based on the four tenets

1. non-conflicting

2. harmonizable across fields

3. not absolute

4. stupid standards


